Sir, the Germans have come
and desire to havethree of your horses:
the duke himself willbe at court to-morrow,
and they are going to meet him.
What duke should thatbe comes so secretly?
I hear not of him in the court.
Let me speak withthe gentlemen:
they speak English?
Ay, sir; I'll call them to you.
They shall have my horses;but I'll make them pay;
I'll sauce them:
they have had my housea week at command;
I have turned away my otherguests: they must come off;
I'll sauce them. Come.
Is he at Master Ford'salready, think'st thou?
Sure he is by this,
or will be presently:
but, truly, he is verycourageous mad
about his throwing intothe water.
Mistress Ford desires youto come suddenly.
I'll be with her by andby;
I'll but bring my youngman here to school.
Look, where his mastercomes;
'tis a playing-day, I see.
How now, Sir Hugh! noschool to-day?
No; Master Slender
is let the boys leave toplay.
Blessing of his heart!
Sir Hugh, my husband saysmy son
profits nothing in theworld at his book.
I pray you, ask him somequestions in his accidence.
Come hither, William;
hold up your head; come.
Come on, sirrah; hold upyour head;
answer your master, be notafraid.
What is 'fair,' William?
Pulcher.
Polecats! there are fairerthings than polecats, sure.
Peace your tattlings!
You are a very simplicity'oman:
I pray you peace.
What is 'lapis,' William?
A stone.
And what is 'a stone,'William?
A pebble.
No, it is 'lapis:'
I pray you, remember inyour prain.
Lapis.
That is a good William.
What is he, William,
that does lend articles?
Articles are borrowedof the pronoun,
and be thus declined,Singulariter,
nominativo,
hic, haec, hoc.
Accusativo, hinc.
I pray you, have yourremembrance, child,
accusativo...
hinc...
...hang, hog.
'Hang-hog' is Latin forbacon, I warrant you.
Cease your prabbles.
What is your genitive caseplural, William?
Genitive case!
Ay.
Genitive,--horum, harum,horum.
Vengeance of Jenny'scase! fie on her!
never name her, child, ifshe be a whore.
For shame, 'oman.
You do ill to teachthe child such words:
he teaches him to hick andto hack,
which they'll do fastenough of themselves,
and to call 'horum:' shameon you!
'Oman, art thou lunatics?
hast thou no understandingsfor thy cases
and the numbers of the genders?
You art as foolish Christiancreatures as I would desires.
I prithee, hold thy peace.
Go your ways, and play;go.
He is a better scholar
than I thought he was.
He is a good sprag memory.
Farewell, Mistress Page.
Adieu, good Sir Hugh.
Get you home, boy. Come,we stay too long.
Mistress Ford,
your sorrow hath eaten upmy sufferance.
I see you are obsequiousin your love,
and I profess requital
to a hair's breadth;
not only, Mistress Ford,
in the simple office oflove,
but in all theaccoutrement,
complement and ceremony ofit.
But are you sure of yourhusband now?
He's a-birding, sweet SirJohn.
What, ho, gossip Ford!what, ho!
Step into the chamber, SirJohn.
How now, sweetheart!
who's at home besidesyourself?
Why, none but mine ownpeople.
Indeed!
No, certainly.
Truly, I am so glad youhave nobody here.
Why?
Why, woman, your husband isin his old lunes again:
he so takes on yonderwith my husband;
so rails against allmarried mankind;
so curses all Eve'sdaughters,
of what complexion soever;
and so buffets himself onthe forehead, crying,
'Peer out, peer out!
' that any madness I everyet beheld
seemed but tameness,civility and patience,
to this his distemper heis in now:
I am glad the fat knightis not here.
Why, does he talk of him?
Of none but him;
and swears he was carriedout,
the last time he searchedfor him, in a basket;
protests to my husband heis now here,
and hath drawn him
and the rest of theircompany from their sport,
to make another experimentof his suspicion:
but I am glad theknight is not here;
now he shall see his ownfoolery.
How near is he, MistressPage?
Hard by; at street end;
he will be here anon.
I am undone! The knight ishere.
Why then you are utterlyshamed,
and he's but a dead man.
What a woman are you!
--Away with him, away with him!
better shame than murder.
Which way should be go?
how should I bestow him?
Shall I put him into thebasket again?
No, I'll come no more i'the basket.
May I not go out ere hecome?
Alas, three of MasterFord's brothers
watch the door withpistols,
that none shall issue out;
otherwise you mightslip away ere he came.
But what make you here?
What shall I do?
I'll creep up into thechimney.
There they always use
to discharge theirbirding-pieces.
Creep into the kiln-hole.
Where is it?
He will seek there, on myword.
Neither press, coffer,chest, trunk, well, vault,
but he hath an abstract
for the remembrance ofsuch places,
and goes to them by hisnote:
there is no hiding you inthe house.
I'll go out then.
If you go out in your ownsemblance, you die, Sir John.
Unless you go outdisguised--
How might we disguise him?
Alas the day, I know not!
There is no woman's gownbig enough for him
otherwise he might put ona hat,
a kerchief and a muffler,and so escape.
Good hearts, devisesomething:
any extremity rather thana mischief.
My maid's aunt, the fat woman ofBrentford, has a gown above.
On my word, it will servehim;
she's as big as he is:
and there's her thrummedhat and her muffler too.
Run up, Sir John.
Go, go, sweet Sir John:
Mistress Page and I will looksome linen for your head.
Quick, quick!
we'll come dress youstraight:
put on the gown the while.
I would my husband wouldmeet him in this shape:
he cannot abide the oldwoman of Brentford;
he swears she's a witch;
forbade her my house and haththreatened to beat her.
Heaven guide him to thyhusband's cudgel,
and the devil guide hiscudgel afterwards!
But is my husband coming?
Ah, in good sadness, ishe;
and talks of the baskettoo,
howsoever he hath hadintelligence.
We'll try that;
for I'll appoint my men tocarry the basket again,
to meet him at the door withit, as they did last time.
Nay, but he'll be herepresently:
let's go dress him likethe witch of Brentford.
I'll first direct my men whatthey shall do with the basket.
Oh John! Robert!
Go up; I'll bring linenfor him straight.
Hang him, dishonestvarlet!
we cannot misuse himenough.
Go, sirs, carry this basketagain on your shoulders:
your master is hard atdoor;
if he bid you set it down,obey him:
quickly, dispatch.
Come, come, take it up.
Pray heaven it be notfull of knight again.
I hope not;
I had as lief bear so muchlead.
Ay, but if it prove true,
Master Page,
have you any way thento unfool me again?
Set down the basket,villain!
Somebody call my wife.
Youth in a basket!
O you panderly rascals!
there's a knot, a ging,
a pack, a conspiracyagainst me:
now shall the devil beshamed.
What, wife, I say! Come,come forth!
Behold what honest clothesyou send forth to bleaching!
Why, this passes, Master Ford;
you are not to goloose any longer;
you must be pinioned.
Why, this is lunatics!
this is mad as a mad dog!
Indeed, Master Ford, thisis not well, indeed.
So say I too, sir.
Come hither, MistressFord;
Mistress Ford the honestwoman,
the modest wife, thevirtuous creature,
that hath the jealousfool to her husband!
I suspect without cause,mistress, do I?
Heaven be my witness youdo,
if you suspect me in anydishonesty.
Well said, brazen-face!hold it out.
Come forth, sirrah!
This passes!
Are you not ashamed? letthe clothes alone.
I shall find you anon.
'Tis unreasonable!
Will you take up yourwife's clothes?
Come away.
Empty the basket, I say!
Why, man, why?
Master Page, as I am aman,
there was one conveyed out of myhouse yesterday in this basket:
why may not he be thereagain?
In my house I am sure heis:
my intelligence is true;
my jealousy is reasonable.
Pluck me out all thelinen.
If you find a man there, heshall die a flea's death.
Here's no man.
By my fidelity, Master Ford,this is not well,
this wrongs you.
Master Ford, you mustpray,
and not follow the imaginationsof your own heart:
this is jealousies.
Well, he's not here I seekfor.
No, nor nowhere else butin your brain.
Help to search my housethis one time.
If I find not what I seek,
show no colour for myextremity;
let me for ever be yourtable-sport;
let them say of me,
'As jealous as Ford,
Chat searched a hollowwalnut
for his wife's leman.'
Satisfy me once more;
once more search with me.
Mistress Page! come youand the old woman down;
my husband will come intothe chamber.
Old woman! what oldwoman's that?
Nay, it is my maid's auntof Brentford.
A witch, a quean, an oldcozening quean!
Have I not forbid her myhouse?
She comes of errands, doesshe?
We are simple men;
we do not know what'sbrought to pass
under the profession offortune-telling.
She works by charms, byspells, by the figure,
and such daubery as thisis,
beyond our element we knownothing.
Come down, you witch,
you hag, you; come down, Isay!
Nay, good, sweet husband!
Good gentlemen, let himnot strike the old woman.
Come, Mother Prat;
come, give me your hand.
I'll prat her.
Out of my door, you witch,
you hag, you baggage,
you polecat, you runyon!
out, out! I'll conjureyou,
I'll fortune-tell you.
Are you not ashamed?
I think you have killedthe poor woman.
Nay, he will do it.
'Tis a goodly credit foryou.
Hang her, witch!
By the yea and no,
I think the 'oman is awitch indeed:
I like not when a 'omanhas a great peard;
I spy a great peard underhis muffler.
Will you follow,gentlemen?
I beseech you, follow;
see but the issue of myjealousy:
if I cry out thus upon notrail,
never trust me when I openagain.
Let's obey his humour alittle further:
come, gentlemen.
Trust me, he beat him mostpitifully.
Nay, by the mass, that hedid not;
he beat him mostunpitifully, methought.
I'll have the cudgel hallowedand hung o'er the altar;
it hath done meritoriousservice.
What think you? may we,
with the warrant ofwomanhood
and the witness of a goodconscience,
pursue him with anyfurther revenge?
The spirit of wantonnessis,
sure, scared out of him:
he will never, I think,attempt us again.
(laughing like a maniac)
(gunshots)
Shall we tell our husbandshow we have served him?
Yes, by all means;
if it be but to scrape thefigures
out of your husband'sbrains.
If they can find in theirhearts
the poor unvirtuous fatknight
shall be any furtherafflicted,
we two will still be theministers.
I'll warrant they'll havehim publicly shamed:
and methinks there wouldbe no period to the jest,
should he not be publiclyshamed.
Come, to the forge withit then; shape it:
I would not have thingscool.
(dogs barking)
I would all the worldwere cozened;
for I have been cozenedand beaten too.
If it should come
to the ear of the court,
how I have been transformed
and how my transformation hathbeen washed and cudgelled,
they would melt me outof my fat drop by drop
and liquor fisherman'sboots with me.
I warrant they would whipme with their fine wits
till I were as crest-fallenas a dried pear.
I never prospered since Iforswore myself at primero.
Well, if I had wind enough tosay my prayers,
I would repent.
(barking)
'Tis one of the bestdiscretions
of a 'oman as ever I didlook upon.
And did he send you boththese letters at an instant?
Within a quarter of anhour.
Pardon me, wife.
Henceforth do what thouwilt;
I rather will suspect thesun with cold
Than thee with wantonness:
now doth thy honour stand
In him that was of late anheretic,
As firm as faith.
'Tis well, 'tis well; nomore:
Be not as extreme insubmission
As in offence.
But let our plot goforward:
let our wives Yet onceagain,
to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting withthis old fat fellow,
Where we may take him anddisgrace him for it.
There is no better waythan that they spoke of.
How? to send him word
they'll meet him inthe park at midnight?
Fie, fie! he'll nevercome.
You say he has beenthrown in the rivers
and has been grievouslypeaten as an old 'oman:
methinks there should beterrors
in him that he should notcome;
methinks his flesh ispunished,
he shall have no desires.
So think I too.
Devise but how you'll usehim when he comes,
And let us two devise tobring him thither.
There is an old tale goesthat Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here inWindsor forest,
Doth all the winter-time,at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak,with great ragg'd horns;
And there he blasts thetree and takes the cattle
And makes milch-kine yieldblood and shakes a chain
In a most hideous anddreadful manner:
You have heard of such aspirit,
and well you know thesuperstitious idle-headed eld
Received and did deliverto our age
This tale of Herne thehunter for a truth.
Why, yet there want notmany
that do fear in deep ofnight
to walk by this Herne'soak:
But what of this?
Marry, this is our device;
That Falstaff at that oakshall meet with us.
Diguised like hern with hugehorns on his head.
Well, let it not bedoubted but he'll come:
And in this shape when youhave brought him thither,
What shall be done withhim?
what is your plot?
That also have wethought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter andmy little son
And three or four more
of their growth we'lldress like urchins,
ouphes and fairies, greenand white,
With rounds of waxentapers on their heads,
And rattles in theirhands:
upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she and I,are newly met,
Let them from forth asawpit rush at once
With some diffused song:
upon their sight,
We two in great amazednesswill fly:
Then let them all encirclehim about
And, fairy-like,
to-pinch the uncleanknight,
And ask him why,
that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths
he dares to tread
In shape profane.
And till he tell thetruth,
Let the supposed fairiespinch him sound
And burn him with theirtapers.
The truth being known,
We'll all presentourselves,
dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home toWindsor.
The children must bepractised well
to this, or they'll ne'erdo't.
I will teach the childrentheir behaviors;
and I will be like ajack-an-apes
also, to burn the knightwith my taber.
That will be excellent.
I'll go and buy themvizards.
My Nan shall be the queenof all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robeof white.
That silk will I go buy.
And in that time
Shall Master Slender stealmy Nan away
And marry her at Eton.
Go send to Falstaffstraight.
Nay I'll to him again inname of Brook
He'll tell me all hispurpose:
sure, he'll come.
Fear not you that.
Go get us properties
And tricking for ourfairies.
Let us about it:
it is admirable pleasures
and fery honest knaveries.
Go, Mistress Ford,
Send quickly to Sir John,
to know his mind.
I'll to the doctor:
he hath my good will,
And none but he, to marrywith Nan Page.
That Slender, though welllanded, is an idiot;
And he my husband best ofall affects.
The doctor is wellmoney'd,
and his friends potent atcourt:
he, none but he, shallhave her,
Though twenty thousandworthier come to crave her.
What wouldst thou have,boor?
what: thick-skin?
speak, breathe, discuss;
brief, short, quick, snap.
Marry, sir, I come tospeak
with Sir John Falstafffrom Master Slender.
There's his chamber,
his house, his castle,
his standing-bed andtruckle-bed;
'tis painted about
with the story of theProdigal,
fresh and new.
Go knock and call;
hell speak like anAnthropophaginian
unto thee: knock, I say.
There's an old woman, afat woman,
gone up into his chamber:
I'll be so bold as stay,sir,
till she come down;
I come to speak with her,indeed.
Ha! a fat woman! theknight may be robbed:
I'll call. Bully knight!
bully Sir John!
speak from thy lungsmilitary:
art thou there?
it is thine host, thineEphesian, calls.
How now, mine host!
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar
tarries the coming down
of thy fat woman.
Let her descend, bully,
let her descend;
my chambers arehonourable:
fie! privacy? fie!
There was, mine host,
an old fat woman even nowwith me;
but she's gone.
Pray you, sir,
was't not the wise womanofBrentford?
Ay, marry, was it,mussel-shell:
what would you with her?
My master, sir, MasterSlender,
sent to her,
seeing her go through thestreets,
to know, sir, whether oneNym, sir,
that beguiled him of achain,
had the chain or no.
I spake with the old womanabout it.
And what says she, I pray,sir?
Marry, she says that thevery same man
that beguiled MasterSlender
of his chain cozened himof it.
I would I could havespoken
with the woman herself;
I had other things to havespoken
with her too from him.
What are they? let usknow.
Ay, come; quick.
I may not conceal them,sir.
Conceal them, or thoudiest.
Why, sir, they werenothing
but about Mistress AnnePage;
to know if it were mymaster's fortune
to have her or no.
'Tis, 'tis his fortune.
What, sir?
To have her, or no.
Go; say the woman told meso.
May I be bold to say so,sir?
Ay, sir; like who morebold.
I thank your worship:
I shall make my masterglad with these tidings.
Thou art clerkly,
thou art clerkly, SirJohn.
Was there a wise womanwith thee?
Ay, that there was, minehost;
one that hath taught memore wit
than ever I learned beforein my life;
and I paid nothing for itneither,
but was paid for mylearning.
Out, alas, sir! cozenage,mere cozenage!
Where be my horses?
speak well of them,varletto.
Run away with thecozeners;
for so soon as I camebeyond Eton,
they threw me off frombehind
one of them, in a sloughof mire;
and set spurs and away,
like three German devils,
three Doctor Faustuses.
They are gone
but to meet the duke,villain:
do not say they be fled;
Germans are honest men.
Where is mine host?
What is the matter, sir?
Have a care of yourentertainments:
there is a friend of mine
come to town tells me
there is threecozen-germans
that has cozened all thehosts
of Readins, of Maidenhead,
of Colebrook, of horsesand money.
I tell you for good will,look you:
you are wise and full ofgibes and vlouting-stocks,
and 'tis not convenient
you should be cozened.Fare you well.
Vere is mine host deJarteer?
Here, master doctor,
in perplexity and doubtfuldilemma.
I cannot tell vat is dat:
but it is tell-a me dat
you make grand preparation
for a duke de Jamany:
by my trot, dere is noduke
dat the court is know tocome.
I tell you for good vill:adieu.
Hue and cry, villain, go!
Assist me, knight.
I amundone!
Fly, run, hue and cry,villain!
I am undone!
(laughing)
Now, whence come you?
From the two parties,forsooth.
The devil take one party
and his dam the other!
and so they shall be bothbestowed.
I have suffered more fortheir sakes,
more than the villanousinconstancy
of man's disposition isable to bear.
And have not theysuffered?
Yes, I warrant;
speciously one of them;
Mistress Ford, good heart,
is beaten black and blue,
that you cannot see awhite spot about her.
What tellest thou me ofblack and blue?
I was beaten myself
into all the colours ofthe rainbow;
and I was like to beapprehended
for the witch ofBrentford:
but that my admirabledexterity of wit,
my counterfeiting theaction of an old woman,
protected me, the knaveconstable
had set me i' the stocks,
i' the common stocks, fora witch.
Sir, let me speak with you
in your chamber:
you shall hear how thingsgo;
and, I warrant, to yourcontent.
Here is a letter,
Good hearts, what ado hereis to bring you together!
Sure, one of you does notserve heaven well,
that you are so crossed.
Come up into my chamber.
Master Fenton, talk not tome;
my mind is heavy:
I have had a great loss. I willgive over all.
Yet hear me speak.
Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman,
I'll give thee a hundredpound
in gold more than yourloss.
I will hear you, MasterFenton;
and I will at the leastkeep your counsel.
From time to time I haveacquainted you
With the dear love I bearto fair Anne Page;
Who mutually hath answer'dmy affection,
So far forth as herselfmight be her chooser,
Even to my wish:
I have a letter from her
Of such contents as youwill wonder at;
The mirth whereof solarded with my matter,
That neither singly can bemanifested,
Without the show of both;
fat Falstaff hath a greatscene:
the image of the jest
I'll show you here atlarge.
Hark, good mine host.
To-night at Herne's oak,
just 'twixt twelve andone,
Must my sweet Nan presentthe Fairy Queen;
The purpose why, is here:
in which disguise,
While other jests
are something rank onfoot,
Her father hath commandedher
to slip away with Slender
and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry:
she hath consented:
Now, sir, Her mother,
ever strong against thatmatch
And firm for Doctor Caius,
hath appointed
that he shall likewiseshuffle her away,
While other sports
are tasking of theirminds,
And at the deanery,
where a priest attends,
Straight marry her:
to this her mother's plot
She seemingly obedientlikewise hath
Made promise to thedoctor.
Now, thus it rests:
Her father means she shallbe all in white,
And in that habit,
when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand
and bid her go,
She shall go with him:
her mother hath intended,
The better to denote herto the doctor,
For they must all bemask'd and vizarded,
That quaint in green
she shall be looseenrobed,
With ribands pendent,
flaring 'bout her head;
And when the doctor spieshis vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand,
and, on that token,
The maid hath givenconsent to go with him.
Which means she todeceive, father or mother?
Both, my good host, to goalong with me:
And here it rests,
that you'll procure thevicar
To stay for me at church
'twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name ofmarrying,
To give our hearts unitedceremony.
Well, husband your device;
I'll to the vicar:
Bring you the maid,
you shall not lack apriest.
So shall I evermore bebound to thee;
Besides, I'll make apresent recompense.
(♪ music)